---
sidebar_position: 3
---

# D21S3. Kanban and Process Optimisation

This session will look at Kanban and Process Optimisation from a theoretical perspective.

Kanban is a mechanism for visualising resource allocation and work in progress. Its origins lie in the reorganisation of factories following the second world war. The original Kanban system involved cards that would indicate when inventory is running low at a particular station, requesting more product form a supplier. Kanban originated with the Toyota Production System developed by Taiichi Ohno and Eiji Toyoda.

Kanban is based on a pull-model, as orders are worked on based on demand and due dates for orders. Rather than producing a set amount of product and hoping to sell it, manufacturers would allow themselves to be guided by demand. This meant that there would be less unsold stock sitting in warehouses, and less unfinished products due to lack of resources used up by unsold products.  Teams are allocated significant autonomy to optimise their own work processes and determine what to work on. At the same time, through tracking the passage of these cards through the production process, organisations had a much better idea of where bottlenecks or constraints exist in their production process. While cards were physical objects that would travel with items, manufacturers found they could get an overview of the plant as a whole using heijunka box, a physical box that would show products moving through a production system.

Kanban has been enthusiastically taken up by technology companies in the past twenty years as a means of understanding how work is being handled within an organisation. Technology teams in development and operations have adopted kanban boards to represent unfinished work on development projects, or in resolving unfinished issues. The goal of kanban in information technology project management is to ensure that no team or role within a team is swamped with work. Companies will frequently use a Kanban to visualise the backlog - work that has not been started - and work in progress at various stages. In a software development team, for example, we might be able to see which tasks are in the planning stages, the development stages, and the testing stages. We will notice when a colleague is swamped with work, or when too many projects are competing for attention. By attaching weighting to particular tasks, we are also able to estimate the amount of tasks a team may complete in a certain period - its so-called velocity.



  ### Exercise
  
  As part of this session, we will explore Github Projects

  See more on this here - [Github Project Boards](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/organizing-your-work-with-project-boards/managing-project-boards/about-project-boards)

  We will also look at how this is supported within Salesforce - see here - [Success with Path and Kanban](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/en/content/learn/modules/leads_opportunities_lightning_experience/visualize-success-with-path-and-kanban)