---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# D22S1. Business Analysis

 <iframe src="https://view.genial.ly/621c1a66c2fa410019ff6408" width="400" height="400" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" data-mce-fragment="1" />

## SWOT Analysis

The next step in creating a strategic plan is to conduct a strength, weakness, opportunity, and threat (SWOT) analysis. A SWOT analysis can be applied to an entire company or organisation, or individual projects within an organisation.

There’s an important distinction to be made: strengths and weaknesses are internal; threats and opportunities are external to the organisation. Understanding this distinction and being able to determine the four elements helps organisations to take advantage of their strengths and opportunities, improve the weaknesses, and mitigate risks.

|   | Strengths | Weaknesses |
|---|---|---|
| Internally | What do we want to protect that we have or are good at doing? | What do we want to improve that we have or are not good at doing? |
|   | **Opportunities** | **Threats** |
| Externally | What do we want to take advantage of to help our organisation? | What do we want to defend against to help our organisation?

#### Example

**Strengths:** Evaluate market position, financial resources, staff, products, profitability, and sales channel.
**Weaknesses:** Assess limited financial resources, thin margins, staff issues, and missing sales channels.
**Opportunities:** Identify market entry, launch new products, form alliances, and exploit merger and acquisition opportunities.
**Threats:** Address economic downturns, policy and regulatory changes, competitor threats, price wars, and so on.

### Exercise

[SWOT Analysis Worksheet](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1l8eeL3eHUxm7Z257hTNzghyf1uuHGMpmxoDcM3P8E7c/edit?usp=sharing)

## Porter's Five Forces and Value Chain

Michael Porter's 1979 article How Competitive Forces Shape Strategy introduces five forces that affect the success of products and services in the market. While there are five distinct forces, in different scenarios one or more forces may be more significant. A strategy needs to be developed in relation to these five forces.

<iframe src="https://view.genial.ly/621c37c3d78bcf00190416e4" width="80%" height="400px" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" />

Although the Porter Competitive Forces model helps identify competitive forces and suggest generic strategies, it is not specific and it does not provide a methodology to follow for achieving competitive advantages. The business value chain model allows us to analyse the particular steps involved in creating value.

The value chain model highlights specific business activities where competitive strategies can best be applied and where information systems are most likely to have a strategic impact. This model identifies specific, critical leverage points where a firm can use information technology most effectively to enhance its competitive position.

The value chain model views the firm as a series or chain of basic activities that add a margin of value to a firm's products or services. These activities can be categorised as either primary activities or support activities.

#### Primary Activities

Primary activities are most directly related to the production and distribution of the firm's products and services, which create value for the customer.

Primary activities include inbound logistics, operations, outbound logistics, sales and marketing and service.

*Inbound logistics includes receiving and storing materials for distribution to production.*
*Operations transforms inputs into finished products.*
*Outbound logistics entails storing and distributing finished products.*
*Sales and marketing includes promoting and selling the firm's products.*
*The service activity includes maintenance and repair of the firm's goods and services.*

#### Support Activities

Support activities make the delivery of the primary activities possible and consist of:

*Organisation infrastructure (administration and management)*
*Human resources (employee recruiting, hiring and training)*
*Technology (improving products and the production process)*
*Procurement (purchasing input)*

### Exercise

[Porter's Five Forces Worksheet](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_O1dUsnv9zPRTHr_OYpabknJ6ns3OJ2VzGeeHAsNtqI/edit?usp=sharing)
