---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# D40S1. Reinforcement Learning

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is one of the hottest research topics in the field of modern Artificial Intelligence, and its popularity is rapidly growing.

Therefore, we must mention it in our course even though it is not used for data analysis much.

Let us hear [Brian Farris](https://www.datacouncil.ai/talks/reinforcement-learning-for-data-scientists) discussing the application of Reinforcement Learning in Data Science.

To find out more about Reinforcement Learning, please [read this article](https://towardsdatascience.com/reinforcement-learning-101-e24b50e1d292).

## Final day discussion

We are reaching the final stage of your career accelerator studio
program.

In order to complete the bootcamp and be awarded the Northeastern University
badge of completion, you must complete both the training and project
requirements.

We will discuss the final project next Tuesday.

### Training Completion Requirements

You must demonstrate that your have completed the training by producing the following mini-projects:

1. A HackMD presentation on a topic of your choice.
2. A pandas Jupyter notebook project on GitHub, analyzing top 10 movies
based on the IMDb dataset.
3. A college library database design utilizing replit and SQL on GitHub.
4. A dashboard utilizing SQL, Python and Plotly.
5. A machine learning Jupyter notebook utilizing a minimum of 1 of the
techniques below:
    - Classification (can be a spam/ham classifier)
    - Regression
    - Clustering

All five mini-projects need to be on GitHub, tidy, with good READMEs.

Feel free to arrange a one-to-one with Katia to complete them to the highest possible standard.
