---
sidebar_position: 3
---

# D35S3. Types of machine learning

There are four main types of machine learning:

- [supervised learning](#supervised-learning)
- [unsupervised learning](#unsupervised-learning)
- [reinforcement learning](#reinforcement-learning)
- [deep learning](#reinforcement-learning)

## Supervised learning

Supervised learning is one of the most basic types of machine learning. The most common task in supervised learning is a **classification task**, e.g., when the machine is able to predict what species of Iris it is from the common characteristics inserted as parameters. Classification algorithms can be used on categorical variables such as names of species. For continuous variables, such as prices, a **regression model** can be used to predict an unknown value.

In supervised learning, the machine learning algorithm is trained on the so-called labeled data. Even though the data needs to be labeled accurately for this method to work, supervised learning is extremely powerful when used in the right circumstances.

In supervised learning, the ML algorithm is given a small **training dataset** to work with. This training dataset is a smaller part of the bigger dataset and serves to give the algorithm a basic idea of the problem, solution, and data points to be dealt with.

The training dataset is also very similar to the final dataset in its characteristics and provides the algorithm with the labeled parameters required for the problem.

The algorithm then finds relationships between the parameters given, essentially establishing a cause and effect relationship between the variables in the dataset. At the end of the training, the algorithm has an idea of how the data works and the relationship between the input and the output. So, in the case of an Iris dataset the machine will be able to identify the species of an Iris.

## Unsupervised learning

Unsupervised machine learning holds the advantage of being able to work with unlabeled data. This means that human labor is not required to make the dataset machine-readable, allowing much larger datasets to be worked on by the program.

In supervised learning, the labels allow the algorithm to find the exact nature of the relationship between any two data points. However, unsupervised learning does not have labels to work off of, resulting in the creation of hidden structures. Relationships between data points are perceived by the algorithm in an abstract manner, with no input required from human beings.

**Clustering** is a classic unsupervised learning task where the goal is to find natural groups or clusters in a feature and interpret the input data. There are many different clustering algorithms. One common approach is to divide the data points in a way that each data point falls into a group that is similar to other data points in the same group based on a predefined similarity or distance metric in the feature space.

## Reinforcement learning

Reinforcement learning directly takes inspiration from how human beings learn from data in their lives. It features an algorithm that improves upon itself and learns from new situations using a trial-and-error method. Favourable outputs are encouraged or ‘reinforced’, and non-favorable outputs are discouraged or ‘punished’.

Based on the psychological concept of conditioning, reinforcement learning works by putting the algorithm in a work environment with an interpreter and a reward system. In every iteration of the algorithm, the output result is given to the interpreter, which decides whether the outcome is favorable or not.

In case of the program finding the correct solution, the interpreter reinforces the solution by providing a reward to the algorithm. If the outcome is not favorable, the algorithm is forced to reiterate until it finds a better result. In most cases, the reward system is directly tied to the effectiveness of the result.

In typical reinforcement learning use-cases, such as finding the shortest route between two points on a map, the solution is not an absolute value. Instead, it takes on a score of effectiveness, expressed in a percentage value. The higher this percentage value is, the more reward is given to the algorithm. Thus, the program is trained to give the best possible solution for the best possible reward.

## Deep learning

Deep learning is essentially an autonomous, self-teaching system in which you use existing data to train algorithms to find patterns and then use that to make predictions about new data. For example, you might train a deep learning algorithm to recognize cats on a photograph. You would do that by feeding it millions of images that either contains cats or not. The program will then establish patterns by classifying and clustering the image data (e.g. edges, shapes, colors, distances between the shapes, etc.). Those patterns will then inform a predictive model that is able to look at a new set of images and predict whether they contain cats or not, based on the model it has created using the training data.

Deep learning and reinforcement learning are both systems that learn autonomously. The difference between them is that deep learning is learning from a training set and then applying that learning to a new data set, while reinforcement learning is dynamically learning by adjusting actions based in continuous feedback to maximize a reward.

Deep learning and reinforcement learning aren’t mutually exclusive. In fact, you might use deep learning in a reinforcement learning system, which is referred to as deep reinforcement learning and will be a topic I cover in another post.

## The task

Create a self-marking Google Form that gives examples of ML tasks that have to be identified as either of the types listed above.

Make sure to make me a collaborator on your Google Form!
