---
sidebar_position: 3
---

# D27S3. SQL Aggregations and Functions

Aggregate Functions allow to perform calculations.
An aggregate SQL function always returns a single value.
In order to make an aggregate SQL function return more than one value you need a `GROUP BY` clause.

Some of the most commons ones are MAX, MIN, AVG, SUM, and COUNT functions along with the GROUP BY statement to achieve these results.

## `MAX`

```sql
SELECT
    MAX(trip_total) as max_trip_total
FROM
    bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips
```

## `MIN`

```sql
SELECT
    MIN(trip_total) as min_trip_total
FROM
    bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips
```

## `COUNT`

```sql
SELECT
    COUNT(trip_total) as count_trip_total
FROM
    bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips
```

## `SUM`

Unlike COUNT, SUM does not count the rows, it adds all values.

```sql
SELECT
    SUM(trip_total) as sum_trip_total
FROM
    bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips;
```

## `GROUP BY`

The `GROUP BY` statement allows to generate new tables that use the results of aggregate functions as cell values.

This result table is a grouped table. `GROUP BY` an be used with any aggregate function, e.g., `MAX`, `MIN`, `AVG`, `SUM`, or `COUNT`.

## `GROUP BY` and `MIN`

Let us exemplify `GROUP BY` using BigQuery's data set `chicago_taxi_trips`.

If we check the schema we will see that there is a column `payment_type`.

Let us generate new tables that group by `payment_type`.

To find out the smallest trip total per payment type we can use:

```sql
SELECT
  payment_type,
  MIN(trip_total) AS min_trip_total
FROM
  `bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips`
GROUP BY
  payment_type
ORDER BY
  payment_type;
```

Run the query above and change the sorting function so that the largest minimal values is shown first:

```sql
SELECT
  payment_type,
  MIN(trip_total) AS min_trip_total
FROM
  `bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips`
GROUP BY
  payment_type
ORDER BY
  min_trip_total DESC;
```

## `GROUP BY` and `MAX`

In the next query we find the **maximum** tip for each of the payment type groups.

```sql
SELECT
  payment_type,
  MAX(tips) AS max_tips
FROM
  `bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips`
GROUP BY
  payment_type
ORDER BY
  max_tips DESC;
```

Fascinating results. Change the query so that it orders by payment type alphabetically.

## `GROUP BY` and `AVG`

The `AVG()` function computes the average value for a numeric column.
In the next query we find the **average** toll for each of the taxi company in Chicago.

```sql
SELECT
  company,
  AVG(tolls) AS avg_tolls
FROM
  `bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips`
GROUP BY
  company
ORDER BY
  avg_tolls DESC;
```

Fascinating results. Change the query so that it finds average tips for each payment type.

## `GROUP BY` and `COUNT`

`COUNT` will count the number of fows with a specific value. For exampls, the query below will count all rows grouped by payment type where the name of the company is recorded.

```sql
SELECT
  payment_type,
  COUNT(company) AS number_of_companies
FROM
  `bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips`
GROUP BY
  payment_type
ORDER BY
  number_of_companies DESC;
```

If we want the number of unique companies that accept a specific payment we need `DISTINCT`:

```sql
SELECT
  payment_type,
  COUNT(DISTINCT company) AS number_of_companies
FROM
  `bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips`
GROUP BY
  payment_type
ORDER BY
  number_of_companies DESC;
```

## `GROUP BY` and `SUM`

```sql
SELECT
  company,
  sum(tips)/1000 AS total_tips_thousand_dollars
FROM
  `bigquery-public-data.chicago_taxi_trips.taxi_trips`
GROUP BY
  company
ORDER BY
  total_tips_thousand_dollars DESC;
```

## Extra `GROUP BY` tasks

Using Google's BigQuery explore the dataset:

`bigquery-public-data.new_york_trees.tree_census_2015`.

First of all, explore the schema. It has a detailed explanation of every attribute (reminder: attributes are columns). Try answering the following questions:

1. For each type of tree (use the spc_common column), calculate the average diameter (use the tree_dbh column)
2. For each type of tree (use the spc_common column), calculate the minimum diameter (use the tree_dbh column)
3. For each type of tree (use the spc_common column), calculate the maximum diameter (use the tree_dbh column)
4. Count trees that have a health status of "Poor"
5. What is the maximum, minimum, and average tree_dbh across the entire data set?
6. How many trees are "Damaged"?
7. Get the average diameter for trees grouped by their Latin name. Sort in reverse alphabetical order.